[doc][History server] Update History server documentation (#65139)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/kuberay-history-server.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide covers how to set up and configure the Ray History Server with KubeRay.
```

Trying to make this docs generic. We can just say that this guide use GKE in prerequisite part.

Author: Done!

Reviewer: Can we remove this warning? We are promoting to Beta stage

Author: Removed

Author: @andrewsykim Please correct me if I'm wrong, but as our discussion we don't want to announce it as Beta until everything is in beta ie the KubeRay API as well right?

Author: Correction, I think I misunderstood. The discussion was for the api and not for the history server. We should label the history server as beta.

gcloud storage ls gs://${GCS_BUCKET}/log/
```

## Terminate the RayCluster

Metadata and logs persist after termination, allowing for the safe deletion of the RayCluster.

```sh
kubectl delete raycluster ${RAY_CLUSTER} -n ${NAMESPACE}
```

After the RayCluster terminates, the collector uploads the final events and logs to object storage.

### Storage layout

The collector organizes files in object storage according to the following directory structure:

```text
gs://${GCS_BUCKET}/${RAY_ROOT_DIR}/
├── cluster-metadata/
│   └── <owner_kind_or_raycluster>/
│       └── <namespace>_<cluster_name>/
│           └── <session_name>                        # Cluster metadata JSON
└── cluster-history/
    └── <OwnerKind>/
        └── <namespace>/
            └── <cluster_name>/
                └── <session_name>/
                    ├── logs/
                    │   └── <node_id>/
                    │       ├── dashboard_agent.log
                    │       ├── raylet.out
                    │       └── ...
                    ├── node_events/
                    │   └── <node_id>-<date_hour>     # Node event logs
                    └── job_events/
                        └── <job_id>/

>                             └── <node_id>-<date_hour> # Job event logs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gs://${GCS_BUCKET}/${RAY_ROOT_DIR}/
├── cluster-metadata/
│   ├── raycluster/
│   │   └── <namespace>_<cluster_name>/
│   │       └── <session_name>                            # Empty marker file
│   └── <rayjob|rayservice>/
│       └── <namespace>_<owner_name>_<cluster_name>/
│           └── <session_name>
└── cluster-history/
    ├── raycluster/
    │   └── <namespace>/
    │       └── <cluster_name>/
    │           └── <session_name>/
    │               └── <node_id>/
    │                   ├── logs/
    │                   │   ├── dashboard_agent.log
    │                   │   ├── raylet.out
    │                   │   └── ...
    │                   ├── node_events/
    │                   │   └── <node_id>-<date_hour>     # Node event logs
    │                   └── job_events/
    │                       └── <job_id>/
    │                           └── <node_id>-<date_hour> # Job event logs
    └── <rayjob|rayservice>/
        └── <namespace>/
            └── <owner_name>/
                └── <cluster_name>/
                    └── <session_name>/                   # Same node layout as above
```

Update to our new structure

Author: Updated!

```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For `RayJob` and `RayService`, the paths carry an extra `<owner_name>` segment, and the
`cluster-metadata` directory name joins the owner name into the underscore-separated key.

```

And add brief description

Author: Added the description after the file structure

To list the objects in storage, run the following command:

```sh
gcloud storage ls --recursive gs://${GCS_BUCKET}
```

```text
gs://BUCKET/log/cluster-metadata/raycluster/NAMESPACE_raycluster-historyserver/session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1
gs://BUCKET/log/cluster-history/RayCluster/NAMESPACE/raycluster-historyserver/session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1/logs/0a46878b6f144cdb0ed62e9871caaeb16083547bf34acb5025832ace/dashboard_agent.log
gs://BUCKET/log/cluster-history/RayCluster/NAMESPACE/raycluster-historyserver/session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1/node_events/0a46878b6f144cdb0ed62e9871caaeb16083547bf34acb5025832ace-2026-02-20-13

> gs://BUCKET/log/cluster-history/RayCluster/NAMESPACE/raycluster-historyserver/session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1/job_events/AQAAAA==/0a46878b6f144cdb0ed62e9871caaeb16083547bf34acb5025832ace-2026-02-20-13

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gs://BUCKET/log/cluster-metadata/raycluster/NAMESPACE_raycluster-historyserver/session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1
gs://BUCKET/log/cluster-history/raycluster/NAMESPACE/raycluster-historyserver/session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1/0a46878b6f144cdb0ed62e9871caaeb16083547bf34acb5025832ace/logs/dashboard_agent.log
gs://BUCKET/log/cluster-history/raycluster/NAMESPACE/raycluster-historyserver/session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1/0a46878b6f144cdb0ed62e9871caaeb16083547bf34acb5025832ace/node_events/0a46878b6f144cdb0ed62e9871caaeb16083547bf34acb5025832ace-2026-02-20-13
gs://BUCKET/log/cluster-history/raycluster/NAMESPACE/raycluster-historyserver/session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1/0a46878b6f144cdb0ed62e9871caaeb16083547bf34acb5025832ace/job_events/AQAAAA==/0a46878b6f144cdb0ed62e9871caaeb16083547bf34acb5025832ace-2026-02-20-13
```

Update to the correct format

# Ray History Server with KubeRay

This guide covers how to set up and configure the Ray History Server with KubeRay.

The Ray History Server powers the Ray Dashboard's backend. For information about how to use the Ray Dashboard, see [Ray Dashboard](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-observability/getting-started.html).

## Ray History Server

The Ray History Server is a component in KubeRay used to access and debug Ray workload resources (`RayCluster`, `RayJob`, `RayService`) even after their termination.

The Ray History Server consists of two main components:
1. **Collector**: Runs as a sidecar container on Ray nodes to collect and export events and logs to object storage.
2. **History Server**: A standalone deployment that fetches cluster sessions from storage on demand and serves the Ray Dashboard API.

### Key Features

* **On-Demand Session Loading**: Delivers fast History Server startup by parsing historical cluster sessions lazily on demand when accessed, keeping memory usage stable and bounded.
* **Efficient Storage Footprint**: Compresses log and event streams in object storage to lower cloud storage costs and speed up data transfer.

> * **Unified Workload Support**: Provides historical debugging and log access across `RayCluster`, `RayJob`, and `RayService` resources.

Reviewer 2: The style guide asks writers to [cut benefits lists](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#write-for-humans): "If a feature is worth recommending, recommend it directly. Don't follow 'This approach provides:' with a list of adjectives." It also asks for [precise comparisons](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#keep-comparisons-precise), and "Efficient Storage Footprint" doesn't name a measure.

Two claims in this list are real and load-bearing, so I've folded them into the component descriptions where a reader will actually need them: compression on the collector side, and lazy session parsing on the History Server side. "Unified Workload Support" duplicates the sentence directly above it.

Also: number every ordered-list item `1.`, since MyST renders them in source order and that makes inserting a step a one-line edit.

```suggestion
The Ray History Server is a KubeRay component for accessing and debugging Ray workload resources after they terminate. It supports `RayCluster`, `RayJob`, and `RayService`.

The Ray History Server has two parts:

1. **Collector**: runs as a sidecar container on Ray nodes and exports events and logs to object storage, compressing both streams before upload.
1. **History Server**: a standalone deployment that serves the Ray Dashboard API. It parses a stored cluster session only when you open that session, so memory use stays bounded and startup time doesn't grow with the number of stored sessions.
```

## Prerequisites

Make sure that you have done the following:

* A Kubernetes cluster. This guide uses GKE and `gcloud`, but the concepts apply to other Kubernetes distributions.
* Have [helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) installed and updated.

> * Minimum Ray version installed: v2.55.

Reviewer 2: Three small things in this list:

- The items aren't parallel. Two are noun phrases and one starts with the imperative "Have."
- The lead-in "Make sure that you have done the following:" fits imperatives but not noun phrases. Rewording the lead-in is the smaller change.
- Helm is a proper noun, so the link text should be "Helm."

This is also the natural home for the minimum KubeRay version. Which version introduced the resource names and routes this page now documents? I'd add it as a fourth bullet.

```suggestion
This guide requires the following:

* A Kubernetes cluster. This guide uses GKE and `gcloud`, but the steps apply to other Kubernetes distributions.
* [Helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/), installed and updated.
* Ray 2.55 or later.
```

## Create GKE Cluster with Workload Identity Enabled

If you don't already have a Kubernetes cluster, create a standard GKE cluster with Workload Identity enabled:

```sh
export PROJECT_ID=<PROJECT_ID>
export REGION=<REGION>
export GKE_CLUSTER_NAME=<GKE_CLUSTER_NAME>

gcloud container clusters create ${GKE_CLUSTER_NAME} \
    --region=${REGION} \
    --workload-pool=${PROJECT_ID}.svc.id.goog
```

Get cluster authentication credentials for `kubectl`:

```sh
gcloud container clusters get-credentials ${GKE_CLUSTER_NAME} --region=${REGION} --project=${PROJECT_ID}
```

## Install KubeRay Operator

> Follow [Deploy a KubeRay operator](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/getting-started/kuberay-operator-installation.html#step-2-install-kuberay-operator) to install the latest KubeRay operator from the Helm repository.

Reviewer 2: Prefer a relative link with a heading anchor over a hardcoded `docs.ray.io/en/latest/` URL. The build resolves and verifies it, so a page move fails CI instead of silently producing a 404, and readers on `/en/master/` stay on the build they're reading rather than jumping to the last release.

I also dropped "latest," since the linked page pins a specific operator version and the word goes stale.

```suggestion
Follow [Install KubeRay operator](../getting-started/kuberay-operator-installation.md#step-2-install-kuberay-operator) to install the KubeRay operator from the Helm repository.
```

## Configure Google Cloud Storage & Workload Identity Permissions

> Configure Google Cloud Storage bucket access and Workload Identity IAM permissions for your GKE cluster by following the [Configure GKE with Google Cloud Storage](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/gke-gcs-bucket.html#create-a-kubernetes-service-account) guide.

Reviewer 2: Same cross-reference change as above, plus sentence case and `&` -> "and" in the heading.

I dropped "IAM" because Vale's `Google.Acronyms` rule flags it and the sentence reads fine without it. Restore it if you think the distinction between bucket-level access and IAM bindings matters to the reader here.

```suggestion
## Configure Google Cloud Storage and Workload Identity permissions

Configure Google Cloud Storage bucket access and Workload Identity permissions for your GKE cluster. See [Create a Kubernetes service account](gke-gcs-bucket.md#create-a-kubernetes-service-account).
```

### Data Retention

The Ray History Server does not provide native support for data retention or log purging, as retention requirements vary by user and deployment environment. To manage log expiration and control storage costs, configure object lifecycle policies directly using your cloud storage provider's management features.

> For Google Cloud Storage (GCS), refer to the [GCS Object Lifecycle Management documentation](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/lifecycle) for instructions on setting up automated lifecycle rules for your bucket.

Reviewer 2: Sentence case in the heading, "does not" -> "doesn't", "as" -> "because" for the causal clause, "refer to" -> "See", and dropping "directly," which the style guide lists as filler.

I kept the "(GCS)" definition because later sections use the bare acronym.

Separately, and as a question rather than a request: this section is conceptual guidance sitting between two setup steps, which breaks the flow of the procedure. Would it read better as its own section near the end of the page?

```suggestion
### Data retention

The Ray History Server doesn't purge data or enforce a retention window, because retention requirements vary by deployment. To manage log expiration and control storage costs, configure object lifecycle policies with your cloud storage provider.

For Google Cloud Storage (GCS), see [Object Lifecycle Management](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/lifecycle).
```

Author: I think that makes sense. Let's move this section to near the end of the page.

## Set up Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)

Create the required ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding for the Ray History Server components:

```sh
export NAMESPACE=default
export KSA=<KUBERNETES_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_NAME>

kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: rayclusters-reader
rules:
- apiGroups: ["ray.io"]
  resources: ["rayclusters"]
  verbs: ["get", "list", "watch"]
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  name: historyserver-sa-binding
subjects:
- kind: ServiceAccount
  name: ${KSA}
  namespace: ${NAMESPACE}
roleRef:
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: rayclusters-reader
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
EOF
```

## KubeRay History Server and Collector Images

Official pre-built container images for the KubeRay History Server and Collector are available on Quay.io:
* **History Server Image**: `quay.io/kuberay/historyserver:latest` (or `:nightly`)
* **Collector Image**: `quay.io/kuberay/collector:latest` (or `:nightly`)

> If you want to build custom container images from source and push them to your own container registry, refer to [the build and push guide](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/master/historyserver/docs/image-build-push-guide.md).

Reviewer 2: Sentence case in the heading, active voice in the lead-in (name the actor: KubeRay publishes the images), "refer to" -> "see", and a blank line before the list.

I also split the `(or :nightly)` parentheticals into full image references. The style guide asks writers to avoid parentheticals, and spelling both tags out means a reader can copy either one.

```suggestion
## History Server and collector images

KubeRay publishes prebuilt container images for the History Server and the collector on Quay.io:

* **History Server**: `quay.io/kuberay/historyserver:latest`, or `quay.io/kuberay/historyserver:nightly`
* **Collector**: `quay.io/kuberay/collector:latest`, or `quay.io/kuberay/collector:nightly`

To build the images from source and push them to your own registry, see [the image build and push guide](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/master/historyserver/docs/image-build-push-guide.md).
```

Reviewer 2: Correcting myself here, and deferring to @win5923, who is right about this.

I checked the Quay registry, and neither repository has a `latest` tag:

```
$ curl -s 'https://quay.io/api/v1/repository/kuberay/historyserver/tag/?onlyActiveTags=true' | jq -r '.tags[].name'
nightly
dc3afe8
052b7c3
...
```

33 active tags on each of `kuberay/historyserver` and `kuberay/collector`: `nightly` plus per-commit SHAs. No `latest` on either.

So my suggestion above is wrong, and worse than the original, because spelling both tags out gives `:latest` more prominence than it had. Please don't take it as written. The image references should be `:nightly` (or a pinned SHA), per @win5923's suggestion.

@machichima's point that `latest` is "expected to work after release" is a separate question, and it's yours to settle rather than mine. Worth flagging one docs consideration on it: if the page ships referencing a tag that doesn't exist yet, every reader who follows it before that release gets a failed pull with no indication why. If you want to document the post-release form ahead of time, pinning the working tag now and noting that `:latest` becomes available at release would fail safe in the meantime.

The rest of my suggestion on that comment (sentence-case heading, active voice in the lead-in, `refer to` -> `see`) is independent of the tag question and still applies.

Author: Let's update it to "latest" once history server is officially released. Once history server is officially released, we can update the doc.

## Deploy Ray History Server and Service

> Using the example provided [here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/refs/heads/master/historyserver/config/historyserver-gcs.yaml), deploy a History Server that connects to Google Cloud Storage:

Reviewer 2: Two things here. Sentence case in the heading, and the link text: the style guide asks for [descriptive link text](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#links-and-cross-references) and specifically calls out `here`. Naming the manifest tells the reader what they're about to download. Same pattern at L121.

I trimmed "and Service" from the heading because the manifest creates several objects and the Service isn't the point of the step.

```suggestion
## Deploy the History Server

Deploy a History Server that connects to Google Cloud Storage using the [`historyserver-gcs.yaml` example manifest](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/refs/heads/master/historyserver/config/historyserver-gcs.yaml):
```

```sh
export GCS_BUCKET=<GCS_BUCKET_HERE>
export HISTORY_SERVER_IMAGE=quay.io/kuberay/historyserver:latest

curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/refs/heads/master/historyserver/config/historyserver-gcs.yaml | envsubst | kubectl apply -f -
```

## Deploy Example RayCluster with Collector Sidecar

The collector component of Ray History Server lives on each RayCluster Pod to collect logs and events and export them to object storage.

> Using the example provided [here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/refs/heads/master/historyserver/config/raycluster-gcs.yaml), create a RayCluster with the collector sidecar:

Reviewer 2: Sentence case in the heading, and the same `here` link-text fix as L108.

I also rewrote L119 to lead with the actor. "The collector component of Ray History Server lives on each RayCluster Pod to collect logs and events and export them" has three coordinated verbs hanging off "lives," which makes the sentence hard to parse.

Note that the `Pod` capitalization is correct as written, matching Kubernetes' own convention for API object kinds. L179 writes "pods" lowercase, so one of the two should change for consistency. See the main review comment.

```suggestion
## Deploy an example RayCluster with a collector sidecar

The collector runs on every RayCluster Pod, where it collects logs and events and exports them to object storage.

Create a RayCluster with the collector sidecar using the [`raycluster-gcs.yaml` example manifest](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/refs/heads/master/historyserver/config/raycluster-gcs.yaml):
```

```sh
export GCS_BUCKET=<GCS_BUCKET_HERE>
export COLLECTOR_IMAGE=quay.io/kuberay/collector:latest
export RAY_CLUSTER=raycluster-historyserver

curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/refs/heads/master/historyserver/config/raycluster-gcs.yaml | envsubst | kubectl apply -f -
```

### Collector Sidecar & Manifest Environment Variables

> The following environment variables are configured in the example RayCluster manifest above. They are listed here for reference:

Reviewer 2: Sentence case and `&` -> "and" in the heading, "They are" -> "They're", and active voice: the manifest is the actor that sets the variables. Vale flags both passives on this line. "above" -> "preceding" per `Google.WordList`.

```suggestion
### Environment variables in the example manifest

The preceding example manifest sets the following environment variables. They're listed here for reference:
```

#### Primary Ray Container Environment Variables (Event Export)

To enable event streaming to the collector sidecar, the primary Ray container requires these environment variables:
* `RAY_TMP_ROOT`: Path to the shared Ray temporary directory (default `"/tmp/ray"`).
* `RAY_enable_ray_event`: Enables the Ray event export subsystem (`"true"`).
* `RAY_enable_core_worker_ray_event_to_aggregator`: Enables Core Worker event forwarding to the agent aggregator (`"true"`).
* `RAY_DASHBOARD_AGGREGATOR_AGENT_EVENTS_EXPORT_ADDR`: Target HTTP endpoint for the collector's event server (e.g. `"http://localhost:8084/v1/events"`).

> * `RAY_DASHBOARD_AGGREGATOR_AGENT_EXPOSABLE_EVENT_TYPES`: Comma-separated list of event types collected (e.g. `"TASK_DEFINITION_EVENT,TASK_LIFECYCLE_EVENT,ACTOR_TASK_DEFINITION_EVENT,TASK_PROFILE_EVENT,DRIVER_JOB_DEFINITION_EVENT,DRIVER_JOB_LIFECYCLE_EVENT,ACTOR_DEFINITION_EVENT,ACTOR_LIFECYCLE_EVENT,NODE_DEFINITION_EVENT,NODE_LIFECYCLE_EVENT"`).

Reviewer 2: Sentence case in the heading, imperative in the lead-in ("set these variables" rather than "the container requires these variables"), a blank line before the list, and `e.g.` -> "for example" per `Google.Latin`.

For the last two items I moved the example out of the parenthetical, since the style guide asks writers to avoid parentheticals and these are long enough to bury the description.

```suggestion
#### Ray container variables for event export

To enable event streaming to the collector sidecar, set these environment variables on the primary Ray container:

* `RAY_TMP_ROOT`: Path to the shared Ray temporary directory (default `"/tmp/ray"`).
* `RAY_enable_ray_event`: Enables the Ray event export subsystem (`"true"`).
* `RAY_enable_core_worker_ray_event_to_aggregator`: Enables Core Worker event forwarding to the agent aggregator (`"true"`).
* `RAY_DASHBOARD_AGGREGATOR_AGENT_EVENTS_EXPORT_ADDR`: Target HTTP endpoint for the collector's event server, for example `"http://localhost:8084/v1/events"`.
* `RAY_DASHBOARD_AGGREGATOR_AGENT_EXPOSABLE_EVENT_TYPES`: Comma-separated list of event types to collect, for example `"TASK_DEFINITION_EVENT,TASK_LIFECYCLE_EVENT,ACTOR_TASK_DEFINITION_EVENT,TASK_PROFILE_EVENT,DRIVER_JOB_DEFINITION_EVENT,DRIVER_JOB_LIFECYCLE_EVENT,ACTOR_DEFINITION_EVENT,ACTOR_LIFECYCLE_EVENT,NODE_DEFINITION_EVENT,NODE_LIFECYCLE_EVENT"`.
```

* `RAY_ROLE` (or `--role` flag): Node role (`"Head"` or `"Worker"`).
* `RAY_CLUSTER_NAME` (or `--ray-cluster-name` flag): Name of the target `RayCluster`.

**Required on Head Node Collector:**
* `RAY_DASHBOARD_ADDRESS`: URL of the local Ray Dashboard (e.g. `"http://localhost:8265"`). Used by the head node collector to fetch cluster metadata and poll dashboard APIs. Worker collectors do not require this.

**Optional Head Node Configurations:**
* `RAY_COLLECTOR_ADDITIONAL_ENDPOINTS`: Comma-separated list of static Ray Dashboard API endpoints to periodically poll and store (e.g. `"/api/v0/placement_groups?detail=1&limit=10000"`).
* `RAY_COLLECTOR_POLL_INTERVAL`: Polling frequency interval for additional endpoints (defaults to `"30s"`).

**Optional General Configurations:**
* `RAY_CLUSTER_NAMESPACE` (or `--ray-cluster-namespace` flag): Namespace of the target `RayCluster` (defaults to `"default"`).
* `OWNER_KIND`: Owner resource kind (`"rayjob"` or `"rayservice"`), if applicable.
* `OWNER_NAME`: Owner resource name, if applicable.
* `RAY_ROOT_DIR` (or `--ray-root-dir` flag): Root path prefix for stored Ray logs in object storage (defaults to `"log"`).

> * `EVENTS_PORT` (or `--events-port` flag): Event server listening port matching the Ray container export address (defaults to `8080`, e.g. `8084`).

Reviewer 2: I'm not suggesting a rewrite for this block, because the right fix is structural and it's your call which direction to take.

`**Required on All Nodes:**` here, and `**Required on Head Node Collector:**`, `**Optional Head Node Configurations:**`, and `**Optional General Configurations:**` at L157, L160, and L164, are bold text doing the job of headings. The style guide [reserves bold](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#bold-and-italics) for UI element names, admonition lead-in labels, and definition-list terms. The usual fix would be real headings, but this block is already at H4 and the guide flags that depth as a signal to split the page.

A `{list-table}` handles it without either problem, since the grouping becomes a column rather than a heading level:

````markdown
:::{list-table} Collector container environment variables
:header-rows: 1

* - Variable
  - Required
  - Description
* - `POD_IP`
  - All nodes
  - IP address of the Pod, populated from `status.podIP` with the Kubernetes Downward API.
:::
````

That also gives the `--flag` alternatives a home instead of a parenthetical on every row.

Whichever way you go, a few mechanical items in these lines:

- L146: "The collector sidecar container is configured using the following environment variables" is passive. "Configure the collector sidecar container with the following environment variables:" names the actor.
- L149: "via" -> "with".
- L150, L158, L161, L169: `e.g.` -> "for example".
- L158: "do not require this" -> "don't require this".

Reviewer 2: Two notes after reading the earlier threads on this block, which I hadn't seen when I filed this.

**The grouping is already maintainer-requested, and my proposal keeps it.** @machichima asked to "group env vars by option and not optional so that it's clearer," and @chiayi split them into sections in response. I'm not asking to undo that. My concern is only the mechanism: the groups are currently bold text doing a heading's job. A `{list-table}` with a "Required" column preserves exactly the grouping @machichima asked for, and arguably surfaces it better, since a reader can scan one column instead of tracking which bold label they're under. If you'd rather keep the current shape, that's a reasonable call, and the mechanical fixes in my comment stand either way.

**On `--runtime-class-name`,** I see @andrewsykim already raised this ("I noticed collector has a `--runtime-class-name` but also has a `STORAGE_BACKEND` env var. Do we need both?") and that the resolution was to drop the flag and mention it as an alternative on the variable. So please disregard question 1 in my review body. I was raising it cold without having read your thread. The naming point I'd still make, purely as a reader-facing thing: `runtime-class-name` reads like Kubernetes RuntimeClass, so if the flag stays documented as an alternative, a half-sentence noting the two are unrelated would save some confusion.

:::{important}

> **Shared `/tmp/ray` Volume**: The collector sidecar must share the `/tmp/ray` directory with the primary Ray container using a read-write `emptyDir` volume (e.g. `ray-logs`). This allows the collector to read session logs from the Ray process, and to move logs from previous sessions into `/tmp/ray/prev-logs` before Ray overwrites them. Events don't use this volume; the Ray container pushes them to the collector's event server over HTTP.

Reviewer 2: Four things on this line: "allows the collector to read" is on the guide's [avoid list](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#focus-on-what-the-reader-does) alongside "lets" and "enables"; `e.g.` -> "for example"; the semicolon should be a sentence break; and the bold lead-in label takes sentence case, so "volume" rather than "Volume".

```suggestion
**Shared `/tmp/ray` volume**: The collector sidecar must share the `/tmp/ray` directory with the primary Ray container through a read-write `emptyDir` volume, for example `ray-logs`. The collector needs that volume to read session logs from the Ray process and to move logs from previous sessions into `/tmp/ray/prev-logs` before Ray overwrites them. Events don't use this volume. The Ray container pushes them to the collector's event server over HTTP.
```

:::

## Verification & Testing

### Verify Pod Status

Check that the History Server and RayCluster pods are running:
```sh
kubectl get pods -o wide
```

### Verify Collector GCS Output

Check the collector sidecar logs to verify active event export and session logging:
```sh
kubectl logs -l ray.io/node-type=head -c collector --tail=20
```

List GCS bucket contents to confirm session log uploads:
```sh
gcloud storage ls gs://${GCS_BUCKET}/log/

> ```

Reviewer 2: Sentence case and `&` -> "and" across the three headings, blank lines before the fenced blocks to match L108 and L121, and "GCS" spelled out in the heading since the acronym isn't defined until L63 in the rendered page order.

I used `Pods` here to match L119. See the main review comment on Kubernetes casing.

````suggestion
## Verify the deployment

### Verify Pod status

Check that the History Server and RayCluster Pods are running:

```sh
kubectl get pods -o wide
```

### Verify collector output in Google Cloud Storage

Check the collector sidecar logs to confirm that event export and session logging are active:

```sh
kubectl logs -l ray.io/node-type=head -c collector --tail=20
```

List the bucket contents to confirm session log uploads:

```sh
gcloud storage ls gs://${GCS_BUCKET}/log/
```
````

## Terminate the RayCluster

Metadata and logs persist after termination, allowing for the safe deletion of the RayCluster.

```sh
kubectl delete raycluster ${RAY_CLUSTER} -n ${NAMESPACE}
```

> Once the Ray Cluster terminates, the collector populates object storage with the latest events and logs.

Reviewer 2: "Ray Cluster" as two words is neither the CRD name nor the generic term. Since this sentence is about the object you just deleted, `RayCluster` is the right form.

Also: "Once" -> "After" for a temporal clause, and "latest" is a time-relative word the guide asks writers to drop. "Final" is what's meant here, since these are the last events before shutdown.

```suggestion
After the RayCluster terminates, the collector uploads the final events and logs to object storage.
```

### Storage Layout

The collector organizes files in object storage according to the following directory structure:

```text
gs://${GCS_BUCKET}/${RAY_ROOT_DIR}/
├── cluster-metadata/
│   └── <owner_kind_or_raycluster>/
│       └── <namespace>_<cluster_name>/
│           └── <session_name>                        # Cluster metadata JSON
└── cluster-history/
    └── <OwnerKind>/
        └── <namespace>/
            └── <cluster_name>/
                └── <session_name>/
                    ├── logs/
                    │   └── <node_id>/
                    │       ├── dashboard_agent.log
                    │       ├── raylet.out
                    │       └── ...
                    ├── node_events/
                    │   └── <node_id>-<date_hour>     # Node event logs
                    └── job_events/
                        └── <job_id>/
                            └── <node_id>-<date_hour> # Job event logs
```

> You can run `gsutil ls -r gs://${GCS_BUCKET}` (or `gcloud storage ls --recursive gs://${GCS_BUCKET}`) to list the objects in storage:

Reviewer 2: "You can run X to list the objects" -> the imperative, per the guide's [instruction voice](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#use-the-imperative-for-instructions).

I also dropped the `gsutil` variant. Google has deprecated `gsutil` in favor of `gcloud storage`, and L193 already uses `gcloud storage`, so offering both here is inconsistent within the page and points readers at the legacy tool first.

````suggestion
To list the objects in storage, run the following command:

```sh
gcloud storage ls --recursive gs://${GCS_BUCKET}
```
````

gs://BUCKET/log/cluster-history/RayCluster/NAMESPACE/raycluster-historyserver/session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1/logs/0a46878b6f144cdb0ed62e9871caaeb16083547bf34acb5025832ace/dashboard_agent.log
gs://BUCKET/log/cluster-history/RayCluster/NAMESPACE/raycluster-historyserver/session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1/node_events/0a46878b6f144cdb0ed62e9871caaeb16083547bf34acb5025832ace-2026-02-20-13
gs://BUCKET/log/cluster-history/RayCluster/NAMESPACE/raycluster-historyserver/session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1/job_events/AQAAAA==/0a46878b6f144cdb0ed62e9871caaeb16083547bf34acb5025832ace-2026-02-20-13
```

## Access Terminated RayCluster using Ray Dashboard

To view terminated Ray clusters, setup a local Ray Dashboard that uses the history server endpoint as the backend.

### Port Forward the history server

For the local Ray Dashboard to access the history server, port forward the history server service:
```sh
kubectl port-forward svc/historyserver 8080:30080
```

You can verify the history server API directly by querying the cluster list endpoint:
```sh
curl -s http://localhost:8080/clusters

> ```

Reviewer 2: Sentence case in both headings, "setup" -> "set up" for the verb, "Port Forward" -> "Port-forward", imperative instead of "You can verify," and blank lines before the fenced blocks.

I also settled on "History Server" throughout rather than alternating with "history server." See the main review comment.

Note L244 and L246 predate this PR, so skip them if you'd rather keep the diff tight.

````suggestion
## Access a terminated RayCluster from the Ray Dashboard

To view terminated Ray clusters, set up a local Ray Dashboard that uses the History Server as its backend.

### Port-forward the History Server

For the local Ray Dashboard to reach the History Server, port-forward its service:

```sh
kubectl port-forward svc/historyserver 8080:30080
```

Query the cluster list endpoint to verify the History Server API:

```sh
curl -s http://localhost:8080/clusters
```
````

### Data Retention

The Ray History Server does not provide native support for data retention or log purging, as retention requirements vary by user and deployment environment. To manage log expiration and control storage costs, configure object lifecycle policies directly using your cloud storage provider's management features.

For Google Cloud Storage (GCS), refer to the [GCS Object Lifecycle Management documentation](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/lifecycle) for instructions on setting up automated lifecycle rules for your bucket.

## Set up Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)

Create the required ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding for the Ray History Server components:

```sh
export NAMESPACE=default
export KSA=<KUBERNETES_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_NAME>

kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: rayclusters-reader
rules:
- apiGroups: ["ray.io"]
  resources: ["rayclusters"]
  verbs: ["get", "list", "watch"]
- apiGroups: ["ray.io"]
  resources: ["raycronjobs"]

>   verbs: ["get", "list", "watch", "delete"]

Reviewer 3: Does the History Server need delete permissions? I think it doesn't need any RBAC for raycronjobs, right?

Author: Removed!

---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  name: historyserver-sa-binding
subjects:
- kind: ServiceAccount
  name: ${KSA}
  namespace: ${NAMESPACE}
roleRef:
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: rayclusters-reader
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
EOF
```

## KubeRay History Server and Collector Images

Official pre-built container images for the KubeRay History Server and Collector are available on Quay.io:
* **History Server Image**: `quay.io/kuberay/historyserver:latest` (or `:nightly`)

> * **Collector Image**: `quay.io/kuberay/collector:latest` (or `:nightly`)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **History Server Image**: `quay.io/kuberay/historyserver:nightly`
* **Collector Image**: `quay.io/kuberay/collector:nightly`
```

 Quay publish only nightly and per_commit SHAs, I think use latest cannot work.

Reviewer: I think we are expecting this to work after release

Author: I think to avoid any confusion, lets keep it as just `nightly` for the time being until history server is officially released with 1.7? WDYT, or we can treat it as prepping for the release?

Reviewer: Yes we can do that. After release we can change it to the release version (rather than latest) to ensure user can always reproduce when following the docs

**Required on Head Node Collector:**
* `RAY_DASHBOARD_ADDRESS`: URL of the local Ray Dashboard (e.g. `"http://localhost:8265"`). Used by the head node collector to fetch cluster metadata and poll dashboard APIs. Worker collectors do not require this.

**Optional Head Node Configurations:**
* `RAY_COLLECTOR_ADDITIONAL_ENDPOINTS`: Comma-separated list of static Ray Dashboard API endpoints to periodically poll and store (e.g. `"/api/v0/placement_groups?detail=1&limit=10000"`).
* `RAY_COLLECTOR_POLL_INTERVAL`: Polling frequency interval for additional endpoints (defaults to `"30s"`).

**Optional General Configurations:**
* `RAY_CLUSTER_NAMESPACE` (or `--ray-cluster-namespace` flag): Namespace of the target `RayCluster` (defaults to `"default"`).
* `OWNER_KIND`: Owner resource kind (`"rayjob"` or `"rayservice"`), if applicable.
* `OWNER_NAME`: Owner resource name, if applicable.
* `RAY_ROOT_DIR` (or `--ray-root-dir` flag): Root path prefix for stored Ray logs in object storage (defaults to `"log"`).
* `EVENTS_PORT` (or `--events-port` flag): Event server listening port matching the Ray container export address (defaults to `8080`, e.g. `8084`).

:::{important}

> **Shared `/tmp/ray` Volume**: The collector sidecar must share the `/tmp/ray` directory with the primary Ray container using an `emptyDir` volume (e.g. `ray-logs`). This allows the collector to read session logs and events from the Ray process.

Reviewer: Events are not coming from `/tmp/ray`. Could we update this part to something like following to make it clear?

**Shared `/tmp/ray` Volume**: The collector sidecar must share the `/tmp/ray` directory with the primary Ray container using a read-write `emptyDir` volume (e.g. `ray-logs`). This allows the collector to read session logs from the Ray process, and to move logs from previous sessions into `/tmp/ray/prev-logs` before Ray overwrites them. Events don't use this volume; the Ray container pushes them to the collector's event server over HTTP.

Author: Thanks! Updated!

:::

## Verification & Testing

### Verify Pod Status

Check that the History Server and RayCluster pods are running:
```sh
kubectl get pods -o wide
```

### Verify Collector GCS Output

Check the collector sidecar logs to verify active event export and session logging:
```sh
kubectl logs -l ray.io/node-type=head -c collector --tail=20
```

List GCS bucket contents to confirm session log uploads:
```sh
gcloud storage ls gs://${GCS_BUCKET}/log/
```

## Terminate the RayCluster

Metadata and logs persist after termination, allowing for the safe deletion of the RayCluster.

```sh
kubectl delete raycluster ${RAY_CLUSTER} -n ${NAMESPACE}
```

Once the Ray Cluster terminates, the collector populates object storage with the latest events and logs. You can run `gsutil ls -r gs://${GCS_BUCKET}` to list the current objects in storage.

> The result looks something similar to this:

Reviewer: Would it be better to also show the file architecture here? It may be hard for users to know the log architecture by looking at this output. And we can make this example output shorter (just as reference)

Author: I'm good with that. Let me try to show the file architecture.

Author: PTAL: I changed it into this:
```text
gs://${GCS_BUCKET}/${RAY_ROOT_DIR}/
├── cluster-metadata/
│   └── <owner_kind_or_raycluster>/
│       └── <namespace>_<cluster_name>/
│           └── <session_name>                        # Cluster metadata JSON
└── cluster-history/
    └── <OwnerKind>/
        └── <namespace>/
            └── <cluster_name>/
                └── <session_name>/
                    ├── logs/
                    │   └── <node_id>/
                    │       ├── dashboard_agent.log
                    │       ├── raylet.out
                    │       └── ...
                    ├── node_events/
                    │   └── <node_id>-<date_hour>     # Node event logs
                    └── job_events/
                        └── <job_id>/
                            └── <node_id>-<date_hour>
```

## Ray History Server

The Ray History Server is a component in KubeRay used to access and debug Ray workload resources (`RayCluster`, `RayJob`, `RayService`) even after their termination.

The Ray History Server consists of two main components:
1. **Collector**: Runs as a sidecar container on Ray nodes to collect and export events and logs to object storage.
2. **History Server**: A standalone deployment that fetches cluster sessions from storage on demand and serves the Ray Dashboard API.

> ### Key Features from v1.7

Reviewer 4: Per our discussion in another chat, I would remove the KubeRay v1.7 specific documentation for now until it graduates to Beta. Let's just document what is currently possible without the new KubeRay APIs

Author: Got it, will do.

Author: Done!

> * **Zero-Boilerplate Setup**: Simplifies deployment by removing the need for manual lifecycle bash scripts or container command overrides in your Kubernetes manifests.

Reviewer 4: "Zero-Boilerplate Setup" is an extraggeration :P there is still _some_ boilerplate setup

Author: 😅 I'm actually just going to remove this line, since it is a 1.6->1.7 specific change.

* **On-Demand Session Loading**: Delivers instant History Server startup by parsing historical cluster sessions lazily on demand when accessed, keeping memory usage stable and bounded.
* **Efficient Storage Footprint**: Compresses log and event streams in object storage to lower cloud storage costs and speed up data transfer.
* **Unified Workload Support**: Provides historical debugging and log access across `RayCluster`, `RayJob`, and `RayService` resources.

## Prerequisites

Make sure that you have done the following:

* Have [helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) installed and updated

> * Access and permissions to your Google Cloud project and the `gcloud` command-line tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A Kubernetes cluster. This guide uses GKE, but the concepts apply to other Kubernetes distributions.
```

Author: Updated!

* Minimum Ray Version installed: v2.55

## Environment Variables used

This guide uses the following environment variables:
```sh
export PROJECT_ID=<PROJECT_ID>
export PROJECT_NUMBER=<PROJECT_NUMBER>
export REGION=<REGION>
export GKE_CLUSTER_NAME=<GKE_CLUSTER_NAME>
export GCS_BUCKET=<GCS_BUCKET_HERE>
export GSA_NAME=<GSA_NAME>

> export GSA_EMAIL="${GSA_NAME}@${PROJECT_ID}.iam.gserviceaccount.com"

Reviewer 4: Is GSA_EMAIL really required?

Author: This was another for another method of setting up WI. Removed.

export NAMESPACE=<NAMESPACE>

> export RAY_CLUSTER=<RAY_CLUSTER_NAME>

Author: So we are assuming that users will follow the guide to configure storage: https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/gke-gcs-bucket.html#create-a-kubernetes-service-account which will include setting the `KSA` variable.

> export RAY_CLUSTER=<RAY_CLUSTER_NAME>

Reviewer: We also export env var in some of the following sections. Could we remove this section, and do `export XXX=....`  in each section below so that user knows exactly where those env vars are for.

Author: Done PTAL

```

## Create GKE Cluster with Workload Identity Enabled

Create the GKE cluster with Workload Identity enabled:

```sh
gcloud container clusters create ${GKE_CLUSTER_NAME} \
    --region=${REGION} \
    --workload-pool=${PROJECT_ID}.svc.id.goog
```

Get cluster authentication credentials for `kubectl`:

```sh
gcloud container clusters get-credentials ${GKE_CLUSTER_NAME} --region=${REGION} --project=${PROJECT_ID}
```

## Install KubeRay Operator

Follow [Deploy a KubeRay operator](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/getting-started/kuberay-operator-installation.html#step-2-install-kuberay-operator) to install the latest KubeRay operator from the Helm repository.

:::{note}
The `RayClusterHistoryServer` feature gate is currently in **alpha** and is disabled by default.
:::

To enable automatic collector sidecar injection in KubeRay v1.7+, enable the feature gate when installing the operator:
```sh
helm install kuberay-operator \

>   --set featureGates.RayClusterHistoryServer=true \

Reviewer 4: let's keep the official documentation without the feature gate, I would hope it's still relatively simple with all the changes done on the collector. We can have a separate section at the bottom for this feature or save it for v1.8 docs

Author: I think we can link to the featureGate doc page once it's there.

## Deploy Ray History Server and Service

Using the example provided [here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/refs/heads/master/historyserver/config/historyserver-gcs.yaml), deploy a History Server that connects to Google Cloud Storage:

```sh
export HISTORY_SERVER_IMAGE=quay.io/kuberay/historyserver:latest

curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/refs/heads/master/historyserver/config/historyserver-gcs.yaml | envsubst | kubectl apply -f -
```

## Deploy Example RayCluster with Collector Sidecar

The collector component of Ray History Server lives on each RayCluster Pod to collect logs and events and export them to object storage.

Using the example provided [here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/refs/heads/master/historyserver/config/raycluster-gcs.yaml), create a RayCluster with the collector sidecar:

```sh
export COLLECTOR_IMAGE=quay.io/kuberay/collector:latest
export RAY_CLUSTER=raycluster-historyserver

curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/refs/heads/master/historyserver/config/raycluster-gcs.yaml | envsubst | kubectl apply -f -
```

> ### Collector Sidecar & Manifest Environment Variables

Reviewer: I think this section is to list out the env vars that are set within the collector example above (not something users need to config). Should we make it clear that this part is just listing them out for reference, and they are all set in the collector config?

Author: So i made multiple sections separating out what they are for. Thanks!

#### Primary Ray Container Environment Variables (Event Export)

To enable event streaming to the collector when **manually specifying the sidecar container (without feature gate)**, the primary Ray container requires these environment variables:
* `RAY_enable_ray_event`: Enables the Ray event export subsystem (`"true"`).
* `RAY_enable_core_worker_ray_event_to_aggregator`: Enables Core Worker event forwarding to the agent aggregator (`"true"`).
* `RAY_DASHBOARD_AGGREGATOR_AGENT_EVENTS_EXPORT_ADDR`: Target HTTP endpoint for the collector's event server (e.g. `"http://localhost:8084/v1/events"`).
* `RAY_DASHBOARD_AGGREGATOR_AGENT_EXPOSABLE_EVENT_TYPES`: Comma-separated list of event types collected (e.g. `"TASK_DEFINITION_EVENT,TASK_LIFECYCLE_EVENT,ACTOR_TASK_DEFINITION_EVENT,TASK_PROFILE_EVENT,DRIVER_JOB_DEFINITION_EVENT,DRIVER_JOB_LIFECYCLE_EVENT,ACTOR_DEFINITION_EVENT,ACTOR_LIFECYCLE_EVENT,NODE_DEFINITION_EVENT,NODE_LIFECYCLE_EVENT"`).

> #### Collector Container Environment Variables

Reviewer: Could we group env vars by option and not optional so that it's clearer?

Author: I separated the env vars into different sections. PTAL!

The collector sidecar container is configured using the following environment variables:

> * `STORAGE_BACKEND` (or `RUNTIME_CLASS_NAME`): Storage backend type (`gcs`, `s3`, `azureblob`, `aliyunoss`).

Reviewer 4: do we still need `RUNTIME_CLASS_NAME`?

Reviewer 4: I noticed collector has a --runtime-class-name but also has a STORAGE_BACKEND env var. Do we need both? Can we just have `--storage-backend` and STORAGE_BACKEND?

Author: Removed runtime class name and mentioned in the variable that `--runtime-class-time` can be used instead of `STORAGE_BACKEND`

* `GCS_BUCKET` (or `S3_BUCKET`, `AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT`): Object storage bucket or account name.
* `RAY_CLUSTER_NAME`: Name of the target `RayCluster`.
* `RAY_CLUSTER_NAMESPACE`: Namespace of the target `RayCluster` (default `"default"`).
* `RAY_ROLE`: Node role (`"Head"` or `"Worker"`).
* `OWNER_KIND`: Owner resource kind (`"rayjob"` or `"rayservice"`), if applicable.
* `OWNER_NAME`: Owner resource name, if applicable.
* `RAY_ROOT_DIR`: Root path prefix for stored Ray logs in object storage (e.g. `"log"` or `"demo"`).
* `EVENTS_PORT`: Event server listening port matching the Ray container export address (default `8080`, e.g. `8084`).
* `RAY_DASHBOARD_ADDRESS`: URL of the local Ray Dashboard (e.g. `"http://localhost:8265"`), used by the head collector to fetch metadata.
* `RAY_COLLECTOR_ADDITIONAL_ENDPOINTS`: Comma-separated list of static Ray Dashboard API endpoints to periodically poll and store (e.g. `"/api/v0/placement_groups?detail=1&limit=10000"`).
* `RAY_COLLECTOR_POLL_INTERVAL`: Polling frequency interval for additional endpoints (e.g. `"30s"`).

> * `RAY_TMP_ROOT`: Path to the shared Ray temporary directory (default `"/tmp/ray"`).

Reviewer: I think `POD_IP` and `FQ_RAY_IP` are missing

Author: Added! Thanks!

:::{important}
**Shared `/tmp/ray` Volume**: The collector sidecar must share the `/tmp/ray` directory with the primary Ray container using an `emptyDir` volume (e.g. `ray-logs`). This allows the collector to read session logs and events from the Ray process.
:::

:::{note}

> **Feature Gate vs. Manual Sidecar Specification**:

Reviewer 4: Let's just keep the user guide simple and do the 'manual sidecar' approach for now

Author: Done.

```text
[
 {
  "name": "rayjob-10k-no-boilerplate-dn5kz",
  "namespace": "default",
  "sessionName": "session_2026-07-28_17-07-51_736134_1",
  "createTime": "2026-07-28T17:07:51Z",
  "createTimeStamp": 1785258471,
  "ownerKind": "rayjob",
  "ownerName": "rayjob-10k-no-boilerplate"

>  }

Reviewer 2: This drops the comma that separated the two objects, which makes the sample output invalid JSON. Readers do paste these blocks into a parser.

```suggestion
 },
```

One more in the same block, which I can't attach a suggestion to because it sits outside the diff: L307 has a trailing comma before the closing `]`, so the JSON stays invalid even once this one is restored. It predates the PR, but it's worth changing ` },` to ` }` by hand while you're already editing this block.

]
```

The `/enter_cluster` endpoint sets session cookies so the local Ray Dashboard knows which cluster to display. The endpoint structure follows the format `/enter_cluster/{namespace}/{resourceType}/{resourceName}/{session}`:

* **`{namespace}`**: The Kubernetes namespace of the workload (for example, `default`).
* **`{resourceType}`**: The resource type, supporting `raycluster`, `rayjob`, or `rayservice`.
* **`{resourceName}`**: The name of the target resource.

> * **`{session}`** *(optional)*: The specific session ID (such as `session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1`), `"latest"` to resolve the most recent session, or `"live"` for an active cluster. If omitted, it defaults to `"latest"`.

Reviewer 2: The style guide says [don't bold inline code](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#bold-and-italics), since the code styling already sets it apart. These are definition-list terms, so the plain backticked form is the right one.

I also unpacked the parentheticals into sentences, moved "(optional)" to the start of the description where it's easier to spot, and used "such as" rather than a bare parenthetical for the example session ID.

```suggestion
The `/enter_cluster` endpoint sets session cookies so the local Ray Dashboard knows which cluster to display. It takes the form `/enter_cluster/{namespace}/{resourceType}/{resourceName}/{session}`:

* `{namespace}`: The Kubernetes namespace of the workload, such as `default`.
* `{resourceType}`: The resource type. One of `raycluster`, `rayjob`, or `rayservice`.
* `{resourceName}`: The name of the target resource.
* `{session}`: Optional. The session ID, such as `session_2026-02-20_13-03-16_320452_1`. Use `"latest"` for the most recent session, or `"live"` for an active cluster. Defaults to `"latest"`.
```

}
```

### Select Cluster UI Page

Alternatively, you can navigate directly to the Ray History Server cluster selection UI page at `/select_cluster`:

```text
http://localhost:8265/select_cluster
```

This page displays an interactive overview of all historical cluster sessions, including cluster names, namespaces, session statuses, creation timestamps, and an **Open Dashboard** action button to launch and switch between sessions:

> ![Ray History Server Select Cluster UI Page](images/kuberay-historyserver-select-cluster.png)

Reviewer 2: Sentence case in the heading, imperative instead of "you can navigate," and "directly" dropped as filler.

The alt text is the main thing here. The style guide asks for [alt text that describes what the image shows](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#alt-text), and "Ray History Server Select Cluster UI Page" restates the heading, so a screen reader user gets nothing the surrounding prose didn't already give them.

I also split the long sentence at L350, which was carrying five coordinated items plus a description of the button.

````suggestion
### Cluster selection page

Alternatively, navigate to the History Server cluster selection page:

```text
http://localhost:8265/select_cluster
```

This page lists every stored cluster session with its name, namespace, status, and creation timestamp. Each row has an **Open Dashboard** button that switches the Ray Dashboard to that session.

![Cluster selection page listing stored Ray cluster sessions, each row showing a cluster name, namespace, status, creation timestamp, and an Open Dashboard button](images/kuberay-historyserver-select-cluster.png)
````

}
```

### Select Cluster UI Page

> Alternatively, you can navigate directly to the Ray History Server cluster selection UI page at `/select-cluster`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can navigate directly to the Ray History Server cluster selection UI page at `/select_cluster`:
```

Should be `select_cluster`, right?

https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/dc3afe89d6465418cc79999edb21e5ac54c1c414/historyserver/pkg/historyserver/router.go#L290

Author: Thanks!

Author: Done!

```text

> http://localhost:8265/select-cluster

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
http://localhost:8265/select_cluster
```

ditto

Author: Done!

}
```

> ### Cluster selection page

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Cluster selection page

```
nit:

Author: Done!

Alternatively, navigate to the History Server cluster selection page:

```text
http://localhost:8265/select_cluster
```

> This page lists every stored cluster session with its name, namespace, status, and creation timestamp. Each row has an **Open Dashboard** button that switches the Ray Dashboard to that session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page lists every stored cluster session with its name, namespace, status, and creation timestamp. Each row has an **Open Dashboard** button that switches the Ray Dashboard to that session.

```

nit

Author: Added the nl
